>> Brian Holt: So if you are having issues
or just wanna see where I'm at here,
we're at, four dash hooks where
we learned about use state,
by far the most common
hook that you'll use.
The next, we're gonna talk about the next
most common hook that you're gonna use,
which is use effect.
>> Brian Holt: So, state is all about
statefulness in your component of
things that can change over
time in your component.
This will be frequently tied to forms but
you could easily write like a clock,
right?
Or something like that or
something that, and
the other thing is effects will be
usually be used with state as well.
So they tend to combine and compose.
But let's talk about effects,
effects like stands for
side effects, right?
So you have some component and
it has something that's
gonna happen outside of it.
Frequently this is gonna be
like an API request, right?
So you're gonna go reach out to some API,
it's gonna come back with data and
you will see that.
But this could be like, let's say you have
something that you wanna show a clock in
the date time or something like that.
You could be doing that with an effect
because you can think of time as
a side effect to your component, right?
It's anything that's gonna be inputting
into your component that's not just user
input or something like that, so,
>> Brian Holt: Let's go do that.
So make sure your API server is
running because we actually are going
to hit the API now.
So let's go to order.jsx.
This needs client, just make
sure you have that if you don't.
And we're gonna go to order.jsx and
we're gonna
import use effect from React and
we have pizza, cool.
>> Brian Holt: We're gonna be doing
some currency conversions here.
So this is now just built into
the browser, which is super nice.
>> Brian Holt: Number format,
you give it what format you want,
feel free to put this in your own locale.
I'm gonna show you how
to do it with dollars.
>> Brian Holt: So this is currency,
and I want the currency to be USD.
So, we're gonna load in pizza types.
So right now we just have a flat
list of all of these pizza types,
but I want this to be a dynamically
populated of all of our different pizzas.
I, being the generous
course creator that I have,
I've created 32 pizza types for you.
And we're going to use all of them.
Most of them look terrible,
just to be aware of that.
So const, another hook here,
another useState hook,
pizzaTypes,
>> Brian Holt: SetPizzaTypes,
>> Brian Holt: Equals useState with
an empty array, right?
So this is basically gonna say
like start with nothing and
then we will progress from there.
And then I'm gonna have a loading hook.
This is gonna be useful for that,
you can say like set loading to be true.
And we can show the user
a nice spinner and
not render stuff that's not available yet.
And then once everything has loaded,
you can say set loading to false, and
then you can show them
whatever they need to know.
So, useState, we're gonna start by
having the form be loading, right?
Because it won't have all
the pizzas loaded yet.
>> Brian Holt: Okay,
cool, here we're gonna
say let price and selected pizza,
>> Brian Holt: If it's not loading,
I'm gonna say select pizza
equals pizza types.find,
pizza,
>> Brian Holt: Pizza type,
triple equals pizza.id.
So why are we doing this?
We're gonna be keeping track of just the
ID of the pizza type that's been selected.
We have to go actually find inside of our
array of pizza types the correct one and
we're gonna do that by its ID.
And you notice these are not hooks
despite the fact that they're immutable.
This is cuz it's kind of derivative state,
right?
So we can use this state up here to
find this state, this doesn't actually
need to be a hook because it's always
going to be a function of these.
Sorry, these are always
a function of these, right?
So the price is going to be whatever
the pizza's price is, right?
The selected pizza is always
going to be the pizza
type that matches in pizza types, right?
So, view has this concept of derivative
state, I think Svelte has it as well.
Doesn't exist in React, you just keep
track of them in normal variables,
>> Brian Holt: Okay, so
now we're going to adhere that
selected pizza is going to
be the correct pizza object that
we've gotten back from our API.
>> Brian Holt: We're gonna write
a function here called fetchPizzas,
async function fetchPizzas,
pizza types rather, pizza type.
And this is just gonna be
a really normal fetch command.
So, we're gonna say
const pizzaRes equals
await fetch/api/pizzas,
const pizzaJson equals
await pizzaRes.Json.
SetPizzaTypes to be
PizzaJson
>> Brian Holt: And
set loading to be false, cuz we'll be
done loading at that point, right?
>> Brian Holt: All right, so we have this
side effect function that we wanna call.
Where do we call it?
>> Brian Holt: I can't just
say fetch pizza types here.
Why is this a bad idea?
It would run each time
the component is rendered.
You got it, it would run every single
time that the component rendered.
You're basically DDoSing yourself, right?
So that's not a good idea.
How can I run this at the beginning,
right?
That's all, I only wanna do it once,
when the component first loads, right?
Effects, you found the need for effects.
This is exactly what effects are for.
Use effect,
you give it a function of like, hey,
I need you to do this kind of
outside of the render cycle.
So if you find that's exactly what effects
are for, it's like I have my renders, and
I have things that need to happen
outside of the renders, and
I wanna kind of control when that happens.
So in this case,
we're gonna say fetch pizza type.
This isn't still quite
what we want it to do,
this is still going to schedule
an effect after every single render.
So how do we tell it, hey,
we only want this to change once?
There's a second parameter here of like,
hey,
whenever this variable is different
from the previous render, do it again.
So, let's say here we put,
I don't know, pizza size.
>> Brian Holt: Now, every time the user
selected a different pizza size,
this effect would get run again.
That's not actually what we want, right?
We want it to run once, right?
Just at the beginning.
So how do we do that?
Well, we just don't give it anything,
right?
We just give it an empty array, right?
And that's saying, run this once, and
then you're not tracking any variables
here, so you're never gonna run it again.
Make sense, okay.
>> Brian Holt: You'll have to excuse the
backwards walk into the logic there, but
usually, people see this for
the first time.
It's like,
why is there an empty array there, right?
And they get really upset by that,
so I'm trying to walk you back into,
why that empty array exists there.
It does make sense,
it's a little dense to look at,
that's a lot of syntax in one line of
just curly bracket, square bracket,
square bracket, round bracket,
or round parenthesis, right?
It does make sense.
Okay, next question people might ask me,
why can't I just make
this an async function?
I think Burton,
you literally just asked me this.
Async functions return what?
Promises, they always return a promise.
No matter what, if it's an async function,
the return type is always a promise.
And effects, the return type matters.
I'm not gonna show you anything today
where it does matter, but let's say you
wanted it to run once and you wanted it
to run at the end, not the beginning.
This can be useful for clearing timeouts,
that's usually the time that I do it, or
canceling, using an abort token to cancel
a request, or something like that.
You can return a function,
get rid of this async.
>> Brian Holt: This is
how you would do that.
The return here is the cleanup function.
>> Brian Holt: So, all of this to say,
you don't need to do that right now.
It's a fairly rare thing that you need to
clean up, but that's how you would do it.
>> Brian Holt: And that's why we
can't just make this async, right?
That's why I make an async function up
here and then call it for my effect.
I now have selected pizza price,
we're now fetching all of the pizzas, so
eventually this is going to
be full of pizza types here.
Now, this is like one of my
favorite things again about React.
By doing everything this way, I basically
could just treat all of my code down here
as if pizza types already existed.
It reads very optimistically in the sense
of I just assume that the data is gonna be
fed here eventually.
And it makes the code not full of if this,
then that, right?
It's usually just like read as
if the code is here, right?
Let's go replace the options here.
>> Brian Holt: PizzaTypes.map,
pizza, and here we're
just gonna do an option
key equals pizza.id,
we'll talk about keys
here in just a second.
And value equals pizza.id.
And then we want pizza.name
to be down here, pizza.name.
All right, so this is a little dense here.
Let's talk about this for just a second.
It's all concepts you know though.
Between the curly braces can be any
JavaScript expression, whatsoever, right?
If you're familiar with map,
it's a JavaScript function that you're
taking an array of something and
you're turning that into an array
of something else, right?
It's just a transformation
from an array of 1, 2, 3,
4, and you say, map double,
that you'd get 2, 4, 6, 8, right?
It would just transform one to the other.
We have an array of pizza types, and
we wanna transform that into
an array of components, right?
Or elements as it were,
not that that really matters.
That's all we're doing here,
is we're just turning an array of objects
into an array of React stuff, right?
And if you remember,
under the hood, like we saw,
what is JSX transforming that into?
It's an array, right?
So if we give it an array of components,
it knows exactly what to do with them.
So that's why map here works,
we're turning an array of these pizza
objects just into an array of options.
Makes sense?
We follow, right?
Obviously there's some errors here,
but I think if we refresh this,
we should see,
>> Brian Holt: Lots of pizza types.
>> Brian Holt: Which is kinda cool, right?
So if we refresh, look here at
the network, you can see here we have a,
I'm looking just at XHR,
which are Ajax requests here.
You can see it's hitting the API,
it's getting a response back here of
all of the different objects, right?
And it's turning that
into an array of options.